Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a complete course for the CCNA, Cisco
Certified Network Associate, exam.
In this video we will cover static routing,
a very important topic to understand for the
CCNA exam.
In the previous video we looked at the basics
of routing: how routers decide where to forward
packets.
And we looked at two types of routes: Local
routes and Connected routes.
Those routes are automatically added to a
router’s routing table when you configure
an IP address on an interface.
Local routes provide a route to the router’s
own IP address, and Connected routes provide
a route to the network the interface is connected
to.
However, if you want the router to be able
to send traffic to destinations that aren’t
directly connected to the router itself, Local
and Connected routes aren’t enough.
Today’s topic, static routes, enable routers
to send packets to remote destinations, that
aren’t directly connected to the router
itself.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First we’ll briefly review connected and
local routes, while looking at the rest of
the network topology I introduced in the last
video.
Then I will introduce static routes, and how
we can use them to instruct routers about
how to forward packets.
And of course we’ll see how to configure
static routes in the CLI of Cisco routers.
Unlike Connected and Local routes, static
routes are not automatically added to the
routing table and must be manually configured.
Finally, I will also explain the concept of
default routes.
So, first up let’s review Connected and
Local routes by configuring IP addresses on
the routers and checking their routing tables.
In the last video I showed R1, so for this
video let’s start from R2.
I configured IP addresses on G0/0 and G0/1
and enabled both interfaces.
Remember, if an interface is disabled the
connected and local routes for that interface
won’t appear in the routing table.
Now, before I show the routing table I want
you to think about what routes there will
be in the routing table.
There should be one connected route and one
local route per interface, so a total of four
routes.
Remember, these routes are added automatically
when you configure IP addresses on router
interfaces.
So, what will the destination of each route
be?
Well, the connected routes are routes to the
networks R2’s interfaces are connected to.
So, there should be one route to 192.168.12.0/24
and one route to 24.0/24.
And then the local routes are to the exact
IP addresses configured on R2’s interfaces,
so there should be a route to 192.168.12.2/32
and a route to 24.2/32.
Okay, here are the routes.
Note that, for the sake of space, I’m not
showing all of the different codes listed
at the top of the output.
Remember, C means connected and L means local.
Anyway, as expected R2 has two connected routes:
one to 12.0/24 and one to 24.0/24.
Also it has two local routes, one to 12.2/32
and one to 24.2/32.
So, to summarize: R2 knows how to reach its
own IP addresses and destinations in its connected
networks, but it doesn’t know how to reach
destinations in remote networks.
By ‘remote’ networks, I mean networks
not directly connected to R2.
So, R2 knows how to reach destinations in
the 192.168.12.0/24 and 24.0/24 networks,
including its own IP addresses in those networks.
But it doesn’t know how to reach any of
the other networks in this topology.
If R2 receives packets destined for hosts
in these other networks, it will have to drop
them.
R2 doesn’t know where it should send them.
And here’s R3’s configurations. 192.168.13.3/24
on its G0/0 interface and 34.3/24 on G0/1.
So, which routes will it have in its routing
table?
As you should know by now, it has two Connected
and two Local routes.
So, like on R2, R3 knows how to reach its
own IP addresses, those are the local routes,
and destinations in its connected networks,
those are the connected routes, but it doesn’t
know how to reach destinations in remote networks.
So, it knows how to reach 192.168.13.0/24,
including its own IP of 13.3/32, and it also
knows 34.0/24, including its own IP of 34.3/32.
It doesn’t know how to reach any of the
other networks, though.
So, for example, if it receives a packet and
the destination is PC4’s IP address, 192.168.4.10,
R3 wouldn’t be able to forward the packet.
It would have to drop it.
And here’s R4’s configurations.
Note that R4 has three interfaces in use,
so how many routes will it have in its routing
table?
The answer is six, three Connected and three
Local.
Same as R2, R3, and also R1 which we looked
at in the previous video, R4 knows how to
reach its own IP addresses and destinations
in its connected networks, but not how to
reach destinations in remote networks.
These are the networks it knows, and these
are the ones it doesn’t.
For example, if it receives a packet destined
for PC4, 192.168.4.10, it has a route to 4.0/24,
so it would be able to forward the packet
to PC4.
However, if it receives a packet destined
for PC1, 192.168.1.10, it doesn’t have any
routes that match that destination IP, so
it would have to drop the packet.
So, all of these routers have connected and
local routes.
Now let’s start looking at how we can configure
them to allow PC1 and PC4 to communicate.
Notice that I’ve colored the interface labels
for each device, and also added interface
names for PC1 and PC4.
PC1 and PC4 are Linux hosts, and their default
interface name is ‘eth0’, Ethernet0.
These colors will make things easier to understand
as I demonstrate how packets move through
the network.
So, first we are going to look at the concept
of ‘default gateway’.
End hosts like PC1 and PC4 can send packets
directly to destinations in their connected
network.
PC1 is connected to 192.168.1.0/24, so it
can directly communicate with other hosts
in that network, and PC4 is connected to 4.0/24,
so it can directly communicate with hosts
in that network.
However, to send packets to destinations outside
of their local network, they must send the
packets to their ‘default gateway’.
Gateway is an old term for router, so it means
‘default router’.
So, these are the configs on PC1 and PC4.
In Linux, the interface configurations are
stored in a text file that you can edit.
On PC1 for example, there is the line ‘address
192.168.1.10/24’, which configures the IP
address as 1.10 with a prefix length of /24.
And below that is the default gateway configuration,
‘gateway 192.168.1.1’.
So, to send packets to destinations outside
of its local network, PC1 will send packets
to R1.
The default gateway configuration is also
called a ‘default route’.
Basically, it’s a route to 0.0.0.0/0.
All netmask bits are set to 0, none of the
bits in the address are fixed.
0.0.0.0/0 includes all addresses from 0.0.0.0
to 255.255.255.255.
It’s a route that includes everything.
Remember the concept of ‘most specific’
matching route in the previous video?
Well, the default route is the ‘least specific’
route possible, because it includes all IP
addresses.
0.0.0.0/0 includes over 4 billion IP addresses.
On the other hand, a /32 route like a local
route is the most specific route possible
because it specifies only one IP address.
For example 192.168.1.1/32 specifies only
1 IP address.
So, the default route says ‘if there aren’t
any more specific matches for this packet,
don’t drop it.
Send it via this route instead’.
Later we’ll see how to configure a default
route on a Cisco router and what it can be
used for, but for now just understand how
it works for end hosts like PC1 and PC4.
End hosts usually have no need for any more
specific routes.
They just need to know: to send packets outside
of my local network, I should send them to
my default gateway.
So, if PC1 wants to send a packet to PC4,
the source IP address in the IP header is
192.168.1.10, PC1’s IP.
And the destination IP is 4.10, PC4’s IP.
Now here’s a major point: what will the
source and destination MAC addresses be in
the Ethernet header?
This is where you can start to really understand
the role of Layer 2 and Layer 3.
At Layer 3, PC1 wants to send the packet to
PC4, so the destination is PC4’s IP, 192.168.4.10.
However it has to first forward this packet
to its default gateway, R1.
So, it will encapsulate the packet in a frame
and the destination MAC will be R1 G0/2’s
MAC address.
Now, how does it know R1 G0/2’s MAC address?
To learn it, PC1 will first send an ARP request
to 192.168.1.1, R1 G0/2’s IP address.
I will show this part of the process in more
detail in the next part of the course, called
‘Life of a Packet’.
To keep things a bit simpler in this video,
let’s just assume each device already knows
its neighbors’ MAC addresses, I won’t
show all of the ARP exchanges.
So, PC1 sent that frame to its default gateway,
R1.
When R1 receives the frame, it will de-encapsulate
it, meaning it will remove the Layer 2 header
and trailer, and look at the inside packet.
It will then check the routing table for the
most-specific matching route.
It has to make a decision about what it will
do with this packet.
So, here is R1’s routing table at the moment,
just Connected and Local routes.
Do any of these routes match the destination
IP of the packet?
No, R1 has no matching routes in its routing
table.
So what will it do with the packet?
It has no choice but to drop it.
In its current state, R1 doesn’t know how
to properly forward the packet.
To forward it, R1 needs a route to the destination
network, 192.168.4.0/24.
Remember, routes are instructions.
R1 needs a route to say: to send a packet
to destinations in network 192.168.4.0/24,
forward the packet to next hop Y.
Now, we know the destination, the 4.0/24 network,
but what should be the next hop?
What is the next router in the path to the
destination?
Actually, there are two possible paths that
packets from PC1 to PC4 can take.
One is the path via R3.
PC1 to R1 to R3 to R4 to PC4.
The other path is the one via R2.
PC1 to R1 to R2 to R4 to PC4.
In this video we will use the path via R3,
not the path via R2.
So, we won’t actually use R2 much in this
video.
The reason I included R2 in the diagram is
that I wanted to demonstrate that, if there
are multiple paths to the destination, you
can choose which one the routers should use.
Now, it is possible to configure the routers
to use these multiple paths differently.
Instead of choosing one path, they can ‘load-balance’
between path 1 and 2.
That means some packets will take path 1 and
some will take path 2.
Or they could, for example, use path 1 as
the main path and path 2 as a backup path.
You will learn about these techniques later
in the course.
In this video, we will only use path 1, the
path via R3.
Now, to ensure PC1 and PC4 can communicate
with each other, it’s not just R1 that needs
another route.
Each router in the path needs two routes:
a route to 192.168.1.0/24, PC1’s network,
and a route to 4.0/24, PC4’s network.
This ensures two-way reachability, which means
that PC1 can send packets to PC4, and PC4
can send packets to PC1.
If, for example, all routers had routes to
192.168.4.0/24, but not 1.0/24, PC1 would
be able to send packets to PC4, but PC4’s
replies wouldn’t be able to reach PC1.
R4 would drop the reply because it would have
no route that matches destination 192.168.1.10.
So, we want two-way reachability.
It’s worth noting that, routers don’t
need routes to all networks in the path to
the destination.
For example, R1 doesn’t need a route to
192.168.34.0/24.
It just needs to know: to send packets to
4.0/24, I should send the packets to R3.
R3 will take care of the packets after that.
And likewise, R4 doesn’t need a route to
192.168.13.0/24.
R4 just needs to know: To send packets to
1.0/24, I should send the packets to R3.
R3 will take care of the packets after that.
Okay, continuing on: R1 already has a connected
route to 1.0/24, and R4 already has a connected
route to 4.0/24.
However, the other routes must be manually
configured, using static routes.
Before we get into actually configuring static
routes, let’s plan out the routes we will
configure.
Here’s a chart of the routes R1, R3, and
R4 need to allow PC1 and PC4 to communicate
with each other.
In blue are R1 and R4’s connected routes,
note I listed the next-hop as ‘connected’.
Then, in red are the static routes we have
to configure.
I will show the answers, but before that I
want you to pause the video and think about
what the next hop IP address should be for
each route.
Now let’s check.
For R1 to send a packet to the 4.0/24 network,
what is the correct next-hop IP address?
Remember, we’re using the path via R3 for
this video, not the path via R2.
The answer is 192.168.13.3, the IP address
of R3’s G0/0 interface.
R1 has a connected route to 192.168.13.0/24,
so it knows how to reach 13.3.
It can then use that IP address as a next-hop
to send packets toward the 4.0/24 network.
Okay next one, what next-hop IP should R3
use to send packets to the 192.168.1.0/24
network?
The answer is 192.168.13.1, R1’s G0/0 interface.
And how about 4.0/24?
It should send packets to 192.168.34.4, R4’s
G0/1 interface.
Finally, what next hop should R4 use to send
packets to the 1.0/24 network?
The answer is 192.168.34.3, the IP address
of R3’s G0/1 interface.
Okay, we’ve planned the static routes we
need to configure.
To allow PC1 and PC4 to communicate with each
other over the network, let’s configure
these static routes on R1, R3, and R4.
First up, let’s configure R1’s route to
192.168.4.0/24.
Here is the format of the command.
From global config mode, IP ROUTE, followed
by the destination network IP, netmask, and
next-hop IP.
So, for R1’s route to the 4.0/24 network
The command is this: IP ROUTE 192.168.4.0
255.255.255.0 192.168.13.3.
That’s it, fairly simple.
I then checked R1’s routing table.
Notice I highlighted the code for static routes,
it’s S as you might have guessed.
And I’ve also highlighted the route itself
in the table.
Notice in square brackets there are two numbers:
one slash zero.
What do those numbers mean?
They are the route’s “administrative distance”
and “metric”.
We will cover these concepts later in the
course, don’t worry about their meaning
for now.
I’m just pointing them out in case you’re
curious what those numbers are.
Okay, that’s all we have to configure on
R1.
It now knows that, to reach PC4’s network,
it should forward packets to 192.168.13.3,
R3.
Next up, R3.
It needs two routes, one to 1.0/24 and one
to 4.0/24.
The format of the command is the same as on
R1.
If you can, pause the video and try to figure
out the correct commands on R3.
Here is the route to the 192.168.1.0/24 network,
with R1 as the next hop.
And here is the route to 4.0/24, with R4 as
the next hop.
And then I checked R3’s routing table too.
Again, you can see both routes there with
their next-hop IP addresses.
To reach 192.168.1.0/24, send packets to R1.
To reach 4.0/24, send packets to R4.
And finally, let’s configure R4’s route
to the 192.168.1.0/24 network.
Again, try to pause the video and figure out
the correct command if you can.
Here is the answer.
IP ROUTE 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0 192.168.34.3,
using R3’s G0/1 interface IP address as
the next hop.
And here is R4’s routing table now.
So, we have now configured all of the static
routes necessary for PC1 and PC4 to communicate.
Let’s test it out and see if they can actually
communicate with each other.
To test it out, I pinged from PC1 to PC4,
and the ping was successful.
As I’ve highlighted, it says 5 packets transmitted,
5 packets received, 0% packet loss.
If the ping is successful, that means there
is two-way reachability.
PC1 can reach PC4, and PC4 can reach PC1.
If PC1 could reach PC4, but PC4 couldn’t
send replies back to PC1, the ping wouldn’t
work.
So, the configurations were successful.
Now, let me briefly show how a packet from
PC1 to PC4 is encapsulated, de-encapsulated,
and re-encapsulated in different frames as
it travels through the network.
We will examine this process step-by-step
in the ‘Life of a Packet’ video coming
up soon, so this is just a brief preview.
You don’t have to think too much about the
process yet.
As you saw earlier, when PC1 sends a message
to PC4 the Layer 3 destination is PC4’s
IP address, 192.168.4.10.
However, at Layer 2 the destination is PC1’s
default gateway, which is R1’s G0/2 interface.
Now R1 has the packet and its R1’s job to
forward it to the next-hop, R3.
To do so, it encapsulates the packet in a
new Ethernet frame.
This time the destination of the frame is
the next-hop’s MAC address, so the MAC of
R3’s G0/0 interface.
Now R3 has the packet and must forward it
to the next hop, R4.
To do that, it once again encapsulates the
packet in a new Ethernet frame, and the destination
of that frame is the MAC of R4’s G0/1 interface.
Now R4 has the packet, and since its directly
connected to the destination network, it can
forward the packet to PC4.
It does that by encapsulating the packet in
a frame with PC4’s MAC as the destination.
This is the only time in the journey that
the destination IP and MAC are of the same
device.
The destination IP is PC4’s IP, and the
destination MAC is PC4’s MAC also.
This process is very important to understand,
but as I said we will cover it step-by-step
in another video.
For now, just understand that the source and
destination IPs of the packet do not change
throughout the journey, but each time the
packet is de-encapsulated and re-encapsulated,
the source and destination MAC addresses are
different.
Okay, now I want to introduce another option
when configuring static routes.
We haven’t configured any routes on R2 yet,
so I’ll just use it for this demonstration.
When configuring static routes, instead of
configuring a next-hop you can configure an
‘exit-interface’ instead.
That means you specify which interface this
router should send the packets out of, rather
than telling it the actual IP address of the
next hop.
For example if R2 wants to send packets to
the 192.168.1.0/24 network, it should send
the packets to R1.
What interface should R2 send packets out
of to reach R1?
G0/0, because that interface is connected
to R1.
So, here’s the command: IP ROUTE 192.168.1.0
255.255.255.0 G0/0.
You can type out the whole interface name
if you want, or just a shortcut like g0/0
is fine.
Now, before we check the routing table there
is one more option.
You can specify both the exit interface and
the next hop.
So, if R2 wants to send packets to the 192.168.4.0/24
network, it should send packets to R4.
And which interface should it send packets
out of to reach R4?
G0/1, because its connected to R4.
And what is the next-hop IP address?
It’s 192.168.24.4, the IP of R4’s G0/0
interface.
So here’s the command.
IP ROUTE 192.168.4.0 255.255.255.0 G0/1 192.168.24.4.
Okay, and here is R2’s routing table now,
you can see how each route is displayed.
An interesting point is that, when you specify
only the exit interface of the static route,
it says the destination network ‘is directly
connected’.
Look at the route I’ve highlighted in blue,
192.168.1.0/24 is directly connected.
That network is not directly connected to
R2, but that’s how it displays in the routing
table when you configure only the exit interface.
Static routes in which you specify only the
exit-interface rely on a feature called ‘proxy
ARP’ to function.
This is usually not a problem, but generally
you can stick to specifying next-hop only
or both exit-interface and next-hop.
Neither configuration method is necessarily
‘better’ than the others, just use whichever
you prefer.
Note that Proxy ARP is beyond the scope of
the CCNA, I won’t spend time explaining
it here.
However, you should know that, when configuring
static routes, you can specify the next-hop,
the exit-interface, or both.
Okay, for the final topic I’ll introduce
how to configure a default route on a Cisco
router.
I introduced the concept of default routes
when explaining how a PC’s default gateway
works, but let’s review.
A default route is a route to 0.0.0.0/0.
/0 means that all bits of the netmask are
0, so none of the bits of the address are
fixed.
They can all change to be either 0 or 1.
So, 0.0.0.0/0 is the least specific route
possible; it includes every possible destination
IP address.
If the router doesn’t have any more specific
routes that match a packet’s destination
IP address, the router will forward the packet
using the default route.
So, a default route is often used to direct
traffic to the Internet.
In the network below, R1 is connected to R2
and R3, which are other routers owned by the
same business.
More specific routes are used for destinations
in the internal corporate network, such as
destinations connected to R2 and R3.
However traffic to destinations outside of
the internal network is sent to the Internet,
using the default route.
This isn’t the only way to use a default
route, but it’s a very common use case.
Okay, I added some IP addresses to the diagram,
and also configured a couple static routes
which I’m not showing here.
I then checked R1’s routing table.
First, notice the part I’ve highlighted.
Gateway of last resort is not set.
This means that no default route has been
configured yet.
‘Gateway of last resort’ is another name
for ‘default gateway’.
Now, in R1’s routing table there is a route
to 10.0.0.0/8 with R2 as the next hop, and
a route to 172.16.0.0/16 with R3 as the next
hop.
Perhaps these are networks used internally
by the company.
Now let’s tell R1 to send all other traffic
to the Internet.
Here’s how to configure a default route.
The structure of the command is the same as
any other static route, but the network and
netmask should both be all 0s, 0.0.0.0.
And that’s it, R1 now has a default route.
I checked R1’s routing table.
Let me point out a few things.
First, here’s the route.
0.0.0.0 via 203.0.113.2.
Notice, next to the S code indicating that
it’s a static route, there is an asterisk.
What does that mean?
In the codes legend it says that the asterisk
means ‘candidate default’.
It means this route is a candidate to become
the router’s default route.
It’s possible to have multiple candidates.
In this case there’s only this one, and
here it states “Gateway of last resort is
203.0.113.2 to network 0.0.0.0”, so the
route we configured was indeed selected.
Okay, that’s all we’ll cover about default
routes for now.
The configuration is the same as a regular
static route, just remember that the network
address and netmask are both 0.0.0.0.
We will use default routes in many future
lessons as well, so you’ll get more familiar
with them throughout the course.
Here’s what we covered in this video.
We reviewed connected and local routes by
looking at the routing tables of R2, R3, and
R4.
Then we looked static routes and how to enable
PC1 and PC4 to communicate over the network.
After that we configured the static routes
necessary for them to communicate, and here
I’ve listed the commands to configure static
routes.
Usually I just use the first option, specifying
only the next-hop IP address, but you should
know the other options too.
And the final topic was default routes.
We looked at default routes earlier in the
video when talking about PC1 and PC4’s default
gateways, and then at the end we looked at
how to configure a default route on a Cisco
router.
Okay, now let’s go to the quiz to test your
understanding of what we covered in this video.
Here’s quiz question 1.
Which of the following commands configures
a default route on a Cisco router?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0
10.1.1.255.
When configuring a static route on a Cisco
router, you cannot specify the prefix length
with a slash, you must write out the netmask.
So, B and D are incorrect.
And in a default route, all bits of the netmask
should be 0, as in A, so A is correct.
In C the bits are all 1, making it 255.255.255.255.
That is not correct.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Examine R1’s routing table.
Which interface will it use to forward packets
destined for 8.8.8.8?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is C, gigabitethernet0/2.
The only route that matches destination 8.8.8.8
is the default route.
This route doesn’t specify an interface,
but it does state a next hop of 203.0.113.2.
So, if you look at the route for 203.0.113.0/24,
you’ll find it’s directly connected to
G0/2.
So, R1 will send packets destined for 8.8.8.8
to next hop 203.0.113.2, using the G0/2 interface.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Examine the network below.
Complete the graph with the static routes
needed to allow PC1 and PC4 to communicate
with each other.
Pause the video now to think about the answers.
Okay, let’s check.
Note that the graph specifies R1, R2, and
R4.
We’re not using the path via R3 this time.
So, each router in the path needs a route
to 192.168.1.0/24 and a route to 4.0/24.
R1 has a connected route to 1.0/24, so it
just needs this path to 4.0/24, with 192.168.12.2
as a next hop.
As for R2, it needs this route to 1.0/24,
next hop 12.1, and this route to 4.0/24, next
hop 24.4.
R4 has a connected route to 4.0/24, so it
just needs this route to 1.0/24, next hop
192.168.24.2.
Okay, with these routes on R1, R2, and R4,
PC1 and PC4 should be able to communicate
with each other.
Let’s go to question 4.
Examine the following static route in R1’s
routing table.
What command was used to configure this route?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is D, IP ROUTE 172.20.0.0
255.255.0.0 g0/1.
The route states that the network is directly
connected, so you might think it’s a connected
route added automatically by configuring an
IP address, as in option B. However, that
is wrong for two reasons.
First, the route has the code ‘S’, so
it must be a static route.
A connected route would have a code of C.
And secondly, 172.20.0.0/16 is a network address.
You can’t configure a network address on
an interface, so the IP ADDRESS command in
option B would not work.
When you configure a static route and specify
only the exit interface, as in option D, it
appears as directly connected in the routing
table.
Then, a technique called Proxy ARP is used
to find the next hop.
Proxy ARP is beyond the scope of the CCNA,
but feel free to google it if you’re curious.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Examine the diagram below.
How many static routes would you have to configure
on R3 for it to know all destination networks?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is D, four routes.
R3 knows its connected networks, 192.168.13.0/24
and 192.168.34.0/24.
For it to know all destination networks in
this diagram, you would have to configure
four additional routes, to 192.168.1.0/24,
4.0/24, 12.0/24, and 24.0/24.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz and this video.
I hope it was helpful, thanks for watching.